---
title: "Code Book"
output: html_document
---

This document provide information about the source and final datasets found in this repository.  Details of the process steps taken to produce the final datasets can be found in the readme.md file located in the same repository location as this file.  

## Assignment 

The goal of this assignment is to take a set of data files generated by the UCI Machine Learning Repository , which recorded a set of human activities from a number of subjects, merge a selection of the data into a single data set and use it to create a second tidy data set that groups by subject and activity the average values for all variables. 

## Data background 

One of the most exciting areas in all of data science right now is wearable computing - see for example this article . Companies like Fitbit, Nike, and Jawbone Up are racing to develop the most advanced algorithms to attract new users. The data referenced in this document represents data collected from a series of experiments using accelerometers from the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone.

The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING UPSTAIRS, WALKING DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain.



## Output datasets 

The assignment requests a single data set to be output.  This dataset is a subset of the transformed data (see data transformation section of this document for details of the transformations) ;

output_tidy_dataset.txt : this file contains the transformed data grouped by subject and activity with mean and standard deviation calculated across the groupings. 


## Variables contained in the output datasets 

    SubjectID - the identifier of the subject who performed the activity - an integer value from 1-30
    ActivityName - the decriptive name of the activity being performed 

Variables are included for each feature vector for each pattern are included in the output set : note '-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

- tBodyAcc-XYZ
- tGravityAcc-XYZ
- tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
- tBodyGyro-XYZ
- tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
- tBodyAccMag
- tGravityAccMag
- tBodyAccJerkMag
- tBodyGyroMag
- tBodyGyroJerkMag
- fBodyAcc-XYZ
- fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
- fBodyGyro-XYZ
- fBodyAccMag
- fBodyAccJerkMag
- fBodyGyroMag
- fBodyGyroJerkMag

The set of variables from these signals has been limited to mean and standard deviation values are: 

- mean(): Mean value
- std(): Standard deviation
- meanFreq(): Weighted average of the frequency components to obtain a mean frequency

Additional vector variables are included that contain the **mean** values of the signals in a signal window sample. These are only used on the angle() variable:

-gravity**Mean**
-tBodyAcc**Mean**
-tBodyAccJerk**Mean**
-tBodyGyro**Mean**
-tBodyGyroJerk**Mean**

## Transformations performed 

Full details desciribing the transformations performed on the original dataset and the script used can be found in the readme.md file.  A summary of the transformations is included here for reference.

- 1. Column names for the test x and training x data sets are replaced using friendly names (from features.txt)
- 2. Column name of the test y and trainig y data set is changed to 'ActivityID'
- 3. Test x and test y datasets are merged together 
- 4. Training x and training y datasets are merged together 
- 5. merged data set from 4 is combined with the list of subject identifiers 
- 6. ActivityNames are added to the dataset and the activityID removed. 
- 7. A subset of the dataset is created based on the presence of the word mean or std in the column title. 
- 8. The subset of data in 7 is grouped into a new dataset by subject and activity containing the the mean of the other vectors.  This data set is output to a text file without the row names. 